feat: workflow and config templates (#29)
fulcrumgenomics/python-snakemake-template: README.md

You will have a Git-initialized Snakemake project at the following location:

```console
❯ tree -a myworkflow 
myworkflow
├── .git # contents omitted for brevity
├── .github
│   └── CODEOWNERS
├── .gitignore
├── README.md
├── Snakefile
├── config
│   ├── config.yml
│   └── config_schema.yml
└── environment.yml
```

## Development

Read the [Snakemake Best Practices](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/best_practices.html) and the [Fulcrum Snakemake](https://www.notion.so/fulcrumgenomics/Snakemake-3d836708c9bc47ca868ee9a09ada7d0d) documentation.

### Configuration

[Snakemake supports configuration and validation of workflow parameters.](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html).

To ensure valid inputs to your workflow, use a [configuration schema](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html#validation).

> This template includes an example [configuration schema](config/config_schema.yml) and [configuration file](config/config.yml) to get you started.

Reviewer: I think that's ok because the relative links will work _after_ cookiecuttering, right?

> This template includes an example [configuration schema](config/config_schema.yml) and [configuration file](config/config.yml) to get you started.

Reviewer: 😅

> This template includes an example [configuration schema](config/config_schema.yml) and [configuration file](config/config.yml) to get you started.

Author: 🤦‍♀️ fixed!

> At runtime, the [workflow](Snakefile) [validates the provided configuration](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html#validation) against the defined JSON schema.

Author: Fixed

3. All rules should have the following directives
    - `input`: the input paths
    - `output`: the output paths
    - `log`: the path to the log file. Good practice is to include the workflow name, rule name, and any wildcards in the log file name, e.g. `logs/{workflow_name}.{rule_name}.{wildcard1}.{wildcard2}.log`.
4. The following directives are optional, but recommended when known:
    - `params`: any custom metadata, both static and conditional on the wildcards
    - `threads`: the number of threads to use
    - `resources`: specifies custom resources with the following keywords:
        - `mem_gb`: the amount of memory to allocate (in gigabytes, ex. `8` for eight gigabytes)
5. The parameters to the `input`, `params`, and `output` directives should have keywords

```python
rule:
    input:
       bam='/path/to/bam'
```

6. Shell commands should not contain references to global variables, but only rule directives. Data needed to build the command should be stored in the `params` data structure.

> 7. Both standard input and standard output should be piped to the log file.

Reviewer: As an aside, I'd really love an alternative to this pattern, because it adds friction to debugging. You can't set a `pdb` breakpoint in a tool while it's wrapped in the redirect.

I've been wondering if it's possible to add some configuration or magic to Snakemake to capture the rule's stdout/stderr instead. Just putting the idea out into the world 🙂

Author: +1

You will have a Git-initialized Snakemake project at the following location:

```console
❯ tree -a myworkflow 
myworkflow
├── .git # contents omitted for brevity
├── .github
│   └── CODEOWNERS
├── .gitignore
├── README.md
├── Snakefile
├── config
│   ├── config.yml
│   └── config_schema.yml
└── environment.yml
```

## Development

Read the [Snakemake Best Practices](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/best_practices.html) and the [Fulcrum Snakemake](https://www.notion.so/fulcrumgenomics/Snakemake-3d836708c9bc47ca868ee9a09ada7d0d) documentation. The text below is adapted from the latter.

If there is a single Snakemake workflow, it should be named `Snakefile` and kept at the top level of the repository. If there are multiple workflows, name them according to their function and give them the extension `.smk`.

> Workflow files should mainly contain `rules`.  Any additional code should be added to a separate `Python` toolkit, for example to parse the configuration object, handle samplesheet input, or to organize reference data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Workflow files should mainly contain `rules`.  Any additional code should be added to a separate Python toolkit, for example to parse the configuration object, handle samplesheet input, or to organize reference data.
```

Requirements (e.g. executables) should not be specified in the workflows, but should be maintained as part of an environment (e.g. via [Mamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html)).

The following should be followed:

> 1. All rules should have descriptive names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. All rules should have descriptive names.
```

> 2. All rules should have a short docstring describing what the rule does, and what tool(s) it uses. If there are any custom input or output file formats, describe them, e.g. for a CSV/TSV file list the expected field names. Follow the docstring conventions for Python, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Each rule should have a short docstring describing its behavior and any tools it uses. The docstring should also describe the required fieldnames or schema of any custom input or output file formats. 

Follow Python's docstring conventions, e.g.:
```

> ```python

Reviewer: Can you indent all code blocks in this section so they are appropriately aligned within their bullet item when rendered to markdown?

rule filter_by_min_count:
    """
    Filters rows of input by minimum count.

>     Inputs:
>         file: TSV file with fields name, count, and source describing counts of ...
>     Params:
>         min_count: Minimum count for output.
>     Output:
>         file: Filtered version of input.file containing only rows with count > params.min_count

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Inputs:
        file: TSV file with fields "name", "count", and "source" describing counts of ...
        
    Params:
        min_count: Minimum count for output.
        
    Output:
        file: Filtered version of `input.file` containing only rows where `count > params.min_count`.
```

    """
```

3. All rules should have the following directives
    - `input`: the input paths
    - `output`: the output paths
    - `log`: the path to the log file. Good practice is to include the rule name, and any wildcards in the log file name, e.g. `logs/{rule_name}.{wildcard1}.{wildcard2}.log`.
4. The following directives are optional, but recommended when known:
    - `params`: any custom metadata, both static and conditional on the wildcards
    - `threads`: the number of threads to use
    - `resources`: specifies custom resources with the following keywords:
        - `mem_gb`: the amount of memory to allocate (in gigabytes, ex. `8` for eight gigabytes)

> 5. The parameters to the `input`, `params`, and `output` directives should have keywords

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Inputs, outputs, and parameters should always be provided with keywords, and should always be referenced within the `shell` block by keyword (never positionally).
```

```python
rule:
    input:
       bam='/path/to/bam'
```

6. Shell commands should not contain references to global variables, but only rule directives. Data needed to build the command should be stored in the `params` data structure.
7. Both standard input and standard output should be piped to the log file.

```python
rule:
    ...
    shell:
        """
        (
            echo "Hello Zorld" | sed -e 's_Z_W_'
        ) &> {log}
        """
```

8. Use `ALL_CAPS` for naming global variables. This will help distinguish them from local variables and parameters when used in input functions.
9. Simplify inputs with the use of [Snakemake helper functions](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/rules.html#helpers-for-defining-rules) e.g. `expand` and `multiext`.
10. Use [input functions](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/rules.html#input-functions) where appropriate.
11. Be consistent with your file separator character.

### Configuration

> [Snakemake configuration documentation](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Snakemake supports configuration and validation of workflow parameters.](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html).
```

│   └── CODEOWNERS
├── .gitignore
├── README.md
├── Snakefile
├── config
│   ├── config.yml
│   └── config_schema.yml
└── environment.yml
```

## Development

Read the [Snakemake Best Practices](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/best_practices.html) and the [Fulcrum Snakemake](https://www.notion.so/fulcrumgenomics/Snakemake-3d836708c9bc47ca868ee9a09ada7d0d) documentation. The text below is adapted from the latter.

> 

Author: Maybe this text should be used to update the Notion page and we just keep all of this in one place? The template is only intended for internal use.
